Opioids are a class of drugs that may be prescribed for severe pain
or after a medical or dental procedure.
When your body experiences trauma,
nerve endings send signals through your spinal cord
to your brain which interprets the signal as pain.
Opioid drugs bind to opioid receptors in your brain,
spinal cord, and other areas in your body.
They reduce the pain signals to your brain
and block feelings of pain.
While they can relieve pain,
opioids carry risks and can be highly addictive.
Opioids trigger a release of dopamine,
a chemical in your brain that makes you feel calm, happy, and euphoric.
These feelings are only temporary
and your brain tells you you need more,
or a higher dose, to produce the same effect each time.
This is called tolerance.
Opioids can make your brain and body dependent
encouraging you to take more
and at the same time
reducing your self-control and ability to stop.
Additionally, if you suddenly stop taking opioids,
you can experience withdraw symptoms such as
jitters, insomnia, negative emotions,
and nausea or vomiting.
This can lead to an addiction,
which anyone is at risk for.
People who use opioids to control pain
should contact their health care professional
if they believe that they may be developing
a tolerance or addiction.
If you are prescribed opioids,
take them only as long and as prescribed
by your health care professional.
Side effects of opioids include:
Sleepiness, Constipation, Nausea,
A physical dependence.
Opioids also can cause more serious side effects.
The following might be symptoms of an
opioid overdose and should be reported immediately:
Shallow breathing,
Slowed heart rate,
Loss of consciousness.